AirGap Networks installation guide (#885)
okteto/docs: src/content/self-hosted/manage/airgap.mdx

---
title: AirGap Networks
description: Installing Okteto in AirGap Networks
sidebar_label: AirGap Networks
id: airgap
---

import variables from '../../variables.json';
import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import TiersList from "@theme/TiersList";

# AirGap Networks<TiersList tiers="Enterprise Self-Hosted" />

> Okteto works on AirGap Networks, but it requires custom configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okteto works in air gapped network environments, but will require some custom configuration.
```

Reviewer 2: I think we should remove this line entirely. Anyone doing an airgapped install knows that extra steps are required.  Could we instead talk about what we mean by air gap? (e.g. is a good example IMO https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/topics/offline/quick_start_guide.html)

> This guide has been crafted to help you overcome these hurdles, but we encourage you to [talk to us](https://www.okteto.com/get-demo/) to guide you during the installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide has been crafted to help you overcome these hurdles, but we encourage you to [talk to us](https://support.okteto.com/hc/en-us) to guide you during the installation.
```

Reviewer 2: We should also rephrase this, I don't think this kind of language inspires confidence. We shouldn't say that "it's hard", "it takes more effort", "there are hurdles".  I think we should simply mention that "for airgapped environments, we recommend that you reach out to our team to discuss your requirements and scenarios" or something like that. 

For the link, since the customer is not asking for a demo but for help/guidance, I think that https://www.okteto.com/contact/ is more appropriate.

---

> title: AirGap Networks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Air-Gapped Networks
```

> description: Installing Okteto in AirGap Networks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Installing Okteto in Air-Gapped Network Environments
```

> sidebar_label: AirGap Networks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: Okteto in Air-Gapped Networks
```

id: airgap
---

import variables from '../../variables.json';
import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import TiersList from "@theme/TiersList";

# AirGap Networks<TiersList tiers="Enterprise Self-Hosted" />

Okteto works on AirGap Networks, but it requires custom configuration.
This guide has been crafted to help you overcome these hurdles, but we encourage you to [talk to us](https://www.okteto.com/get-demo/) to guide you during the installation.

> ## Step 1: Disable Okteto Telemetry

Reviewer 2: I think we should start with the more complex scenarios before going into the 'easy' stuff :P

By default, Okteto sends [telemetry data](self-hosted/helm-configuration.mdx#telemetry) to help us understand usage patterns and prioritize improvements
In air-gapped environments, you can disable telemetry by adding the following to your Okteto Helm configuration:

```yaml
telemetry:
  enabled: false
```

Disabling telemetry will automatically stop Okteto CLI analytics for all developers.

## Step 2: Host Images in your Private Registry

> By default, all the images needed to deploy the Okteto Platform, and the images used by the Okteto CLI, are hosted in DockerHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, all the images needed to deploy the Okteto Platform and the images used by the Okteto CLI are hosted in DockerHub.
```

In air-gapped environments, you’ll need to host these images in your private registry.

> ### Push Images to your Private Registry

Reviewer 2: I don't think this subtitle is needed since there's no other 'subtask' in step 2.

> For simplicity, we recommend using the same repository names and tags in your private registry.

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to remove this line so we don't give people ideas that there are other ways. It's better if we recommend a single way of doing things (in this case, to upload to the private registry with the same name/tag)

:::info

> Okteto doesn't support `imagePullSecrets`, so your cluster must be configured to have access to your Private Registry, 

Reviewer 2: I don't undersand what we mean by "Okteto doesn't support imagePullSecrets". Are we talking about the helm chart?

Reviewer 2: If so, I think we should rephrase this positively as "This guide assumes that the nodes of your cluster have image pull access to your private registry. If that's not the case, please follow your infrastructure provider's instructions on how to do it"(or something like that)

:::

> **Required Images for Okteto Platform Installation**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Required Docker images**
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think we use "okteto platform" in the docs (e.g. see https://www.okteto.com/docs/get-started/install/), let's stay with the same terminology we already use in the docs.

> Push the following images to your private registry for the Okteto Chart installation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To install Okteto in an air-gapped environment, you'll need to push the following Docker images to your private registry before installing the Okteto helm chart.  

You must perform this action whenever you upgrade Okteto to a newer version.
```

> - **okteto/backend:{variables.chartVersion}**

Reviewer 2: I think we are missing the following images from here?
1. buildkit rootless
2. daemonset
3. helm (used by support bundle)

- **okteto/frontend:{variables.chartVersion}**
- **okteto/buildkit:{variables.chartVersion}**
- **okteto/registry:{variables.chartVersion}**
- **okteto/pipeline-installer:{variables.chartVersion}**
- **okteto/pipeline-runner:{variables.chartVersion}**
- **okteto/ingress-nginx:{variables.chartVersion}**
- **okteto/reloader:{variables.chartVersion}**
- **okteto/redis:{variables.chartVersion}**

> For each Okteto CLI version, push the following images to your private registry:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each Okteto CLI version that you will enable for your users, you'll need to also push the following images to your private registry:
```

> - **okteto/okteto:{variables.cliVersion}**

Reviewer 2: okteto/bin and busybox are missing from this I believe

- **okteto/dockerfile:{variables.cliVersion}**

:::info

> For Okteto Chart {variables.chartVersion}, we recommend enforcing the usage of Okteto CLI {variables.cliVersion} in your developer's machines to reduce maintenance overhead

Reviewer 2: can we include a link on how to do this? 

Also, we shouldn't recommend, we should tell them this is  a must, otherwise things won't work (e.g. if they let developers install liberally, the okteto/okteto:VERSION image won't be available on the cluster and it will fail. I think 'setting the supported CLI' versions should be a step on the guide. 

In general, with air gapped we need to give stronger direction than on public cloud because every small deviation/variation can break things and slow down the installation.

:::

## Step 3: Update Helm Configuration

Once your images are pushed to your private registry, update your Okteto Helm configuration as follows:

<CodeBlock language="yaml">

>   {`globals:

Reviewer 2: The more things the user needs to configure, the more error prone it is. Is there a way for globals to apply to all of these?

  registry: <<your-registry-url>>

ingress-nginx:
  image:
    image: <<your-registry-url>>/okteto/ingress-nginx

>     tag: ${variables.chartVersion}

Reviewer 2: to they need to specify chartVersion or just the image?

okteto-nginx:
  image:
    image: <<your-registry-url>>/okteto/ingress-nginx
    tag: ${variables.chartVersion}

redis:
  image:
    registry: <<your-registry-url>>
    repository: okteto/reloader
    tag: ${variables.chartVersion}

reloader:
  deployment:
    image:
      name: <<your-registry-url>>/okteto/reloader
      tag: ${variables.chartVersion}
`}
</CodeBlock>

## Step 4: Install or Upgrade Okteto 

Execute the following command to install or upgrade your Okteto instance:

<CodeBlock language="bash">
  {`helm upgrade --install okteto okteto/okteto -f config.yaml --namespace=okteto --create-namespace --version=${variables.chartVersion}`}
</CodeBlock>

## Optional: Use Your Own Ingress Controller

> By default, Okteto deploy an [NGINX Ingress Controller](https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx/) to expose the Okteto Control Plane and the applications managed by Okteto.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, Okteto deploys [NGINX Ingress Controller](https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx/) to expose the Okteto Control Plane and the applications managed by Okteto.
```

> Our NGINX Ingress Controller is usually exposed in a dedicated Load Balancer.

Reviewer 2: Is this detail important for air-gapped installations?

Reviewer 3: I think it is yes. But Im not sure if we could give more details here. Its not just the option of enable/disable it, we could add the MetalLB option, or using ours but adding the machine IP to it: 

```
ingress-nginx:
  controller:
    service:
      externalIPs:
      - 10.132.0.2
```

But maybe thats something we want them to figure out internally...

Author: We shouldn't mention specific controllers, this guide explains the general process:
https://community.okteto.com/t/how-do-i-configure-my-own-ingress-controller/887

> Refer to [this community guide](https://community.okteto.com/t/how-do-i-configure-my-own-ingress-controller/887) for detailed instructions on disabling the installation of our Nginx Ingress Controller and exposing Okteto behind your own Ingress Controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Refer to [this community guide](https://community.okteto.com/t/how-do-i-configure-my-own-ingress-controller/887) for detailed instructions on disabling the installation of our Nginx Ingress Controller and exposing Okteto behind other Ingress Controllers.
```

> ## Install Okteto without a Wildcard Certificate (optional)

Reviewer 2: Is this truly optional on Air Gapped environments? I feel that this recommendation should be part of the Certificates page, since this might be the case even in other types of installations.

Author: It's more common on air-gapped. We can add it to the certificates section, but I call out here will also help

---
title: AirGap Networks
description: Installing Okteto in AirGap Networks
sidebar_label: AirGap Networks
id: airgap
---

import variables from '../../variables.json';
import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import TiersList from "@theme/TiersList";

# AirGap Networks<TiersList tiers="Enterprise Self-Hosted" />

Okteto works on AirGap Networks, but it requires custom configuration.
This guide has been crafted to help you overcome these hurdles, but we encourage you to [talk to us](https://www.okteto.com/get-demo/) to guide you during the installation.

## Step 1: Disable Okteto Telemetry

By default, Okteto sends [telemetry data](self-hosted/helm-configuration.mdx#telemetry) to help us understand usage patterns and prioritize improvements
In air-gapped environments, you can disable telemetry by adding the following to your Okteto Helm configuration:

```yaml
telemetry:
  enabled: false
```

> Disabling telemetry will automatically stop Okteto CLI analytics for all developers.

Reviewer 3: Im not sure but I think that we should disable it from the CLI too right? 
From my testings I recall it was enabled by default. Im still testing other things before this but I have it in my notes

Author: CLI is disabled automatically if you disable telemetry on the chart. Have you seen a different behavior?

Reviewer 3: I can't tell for sure cause I already disable it. But I think I installed Okteto with telemtry disabled and then I had to disable it in the CLI. 

I can test it if you want from scratch, but we could add something like "Make sure that you have analytics disabled in the CLI" ?

Author: Try to enable the CLI analytics `okteto analytics enabled` and it should send metrics if it's disabled at the helm level. It would be a critical bug otherwise

## Step 2: Host Images in your Private Registry

By default, all the images needed to deploy the Okteto Platform and the images used by the Okteto CLI are hosted in DockerHub.

> In air-gapped environments, you’ll need to host these images in your private registry.

Reviewer 3: I was planning to add where to find all the images needed. Do you think is too much information for the guide? I mean, I wouldn't add every image we need, but I would add where to find them. 

For example, in the Chart Artifactory, in the values file, in the dependencies section for the nginx ...

Reviewer 3: I know we added all of them as a list later here, but that means that every time we add a new one we need to update this guide. For me its better if we teach them how to fish instead giving them fish :)

Author: Those are our own images, they don't change that much. We can list them for now and iterate if needed
